Downloadable Content
--------------------------

DLC changed the game industry, this is a fact. How? You may ask.

The answer is very simple: it's an excellent way to extend a game's lifetime, especially for a single-player games. They are both a way to keep people playing a game (or make people come back) and, at the same time, earning money.

As always, there is a good way to do things, and a very bad way.

### DLC: what to avoid

In my opinion there are two major behaviors to avoid, besides the obvious "Do NOT overprice". I'll illustrate them, showing some examples.

**1) Putting the "true" ending in a DLC** This behavior is almost insulting for the customer. Creating a game and put its ending in a DLC is equal to sell an unfinished product, this is the truth. For a "casual fan" it may not matter much, but it's very annoying for a true fan of the game/saga. Why? Because you are implicitly forcing him to pay twice: The game and its DLC.
Some major game companies exploit this mechanic to simply cut off some content of the original game and put it in a DLC: same effort and more income.
I found the pair EA/BioWare to be the major example for this behavior with Dragon Age Inquisition and its DLC "The Trespasser" comes immediately to mind.

**2) Selling a Season Pass "on trust"** With this behavior you're demanding a lot from your customers, things can go really wrong. To put it simple you're selling a Season Pass without presenting the DLC. Ideally if you're selling a season pass from day 1 than you should, at least, let the audience know about the number of future DLC and their basic content/quality/quantity.
So what happens if an over-hyped game is released alongside its season pass and the whole thing is quite a flop? That's the case of FFXV. Square Enix made quite the gamble, and it really didn't pay off. But Square Enix is Square Enix, so it won't go bankrupt any time soon.

### DLC: what to do

The Golden Rules are:

- Limit DLC to **additional content**. Related to the main story, but not concerning major twists or the finale itself;
- Create the DLC with an adequate playtime. If your game is an RPG with over 60 hours of content you simply cannot make a 5-hour long DLC;
- Sell a Season pass only if you're going to publish at least 3 distinct DLCs, or two very extensive ones;
- Obviously make the customer pay a fair price.

I find CD Projekt RED the absolute best company when it comes to DLCs. In particular "The Witcher 3 Wild Hunt"'s two DLCs have all the good qualities that we want.

The adequate content, a fair price and we're talking about a combined 50 hours of extra game time.
