Free-to-Play Economies and LootBoxes
------------------------------------

Let's face the most controversial topic, here we go.

### Microtransactions

This is quite the hot topic at the moment: the infamous, devilish microtransactions. Let's put this clear from the start, microtransactions are NOT intrinsically bad.
As always there's a good way and a bad way to make things. In that case the bad way can bring really backfire nastily.

Microtransactions should be limited to fashion accessories and avatar customization. Nothing related to game mechanics or gameplay-related elements. Everyone **hates** pay-to-win.

We must acknowledge that there are people willing to pay in order to have some bling for their avatar. Microtransactions, and lootboxes as well, should be used for this kind of audience.

I found Blizzard to be the best example for a good implementation for Microtransactions and lootboxes. Overwatch, for example, presents the best example of lootboxes, giving the audience access only to fashion/customization features for the heroes, like: different skins, animations, vocal sounds.

On the other hand EA, with the Fifa series, is the perfect example of how to NOT DO microtransaction/lootboxes. The reason is very simple: Fifa Ultimate Team is the biggest, most greedy, pay-to-win mechanic ever.

You could question me, stating that lootboxes are gambling microtransactions. You're right. It's a tricky topic, so it has to be done right, but it's not bad for the sake of existing. Otherwise we wound end up making an inquisition about how people spend their money.

Now many countries are making an effort to regulate lootboxes (some even making them straight up illegal), so you should be always informed about local laws, and if you decide to implement them, you should know the duties that come with it.

#### The human and social consequences of Lootboxes

Among all monetization schemes, lootboxes are probably among the most controversial. At least the ones that are paid with real-life money.

The objective of lootboxes and microtransactions is to generate a secondary revenue that some experts call "recurrent user spending".

The idea behind lootboxes is having a prize pool from where a random prize is selected, the user buys a lootbox and gets a randomized item (or set of items), usually accompanied by an epic set of animations, colors and music.

This mechanic can remind someone of slot machines, which share the same psychological principle behind their idea.

Flashy lights and music are tailored to trigger certain chemical reactions in our brains, which will make them seem fun. This adds to all the "off by one" psychology, that will hook you to have "one more go" (how many times you heard of people losing the lottery because of numbers "off by one digit"?).

The situation gets even more serious when you want a very specific item in the prize pool, which lowers the chances of a win in the player's eyes and consolidates the "one more go" way of thinking.

Things become horrible when kids are involved, if they see their father buying them a lootbox and learn how to do it, sooner or later the credit card will be rejected (and it happened - [internet archive link to a BBC article](http://web.archive.org/web/20190712061732/https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-48908766)).

The situation becomes catastrophic when you start putting people with compulsive disorders, or people with gaming addiction, gambling addiction and the so-called "whales" (people with high amounts of money and high willingness to spend such money in videogames). Some people use videogames as a mean to escape their gambling addiction and lootboxes can trigger the same mechanisms in the peoples' brains.

This obviously has serious consequences when it comes to consumer trust and the image of your game development studio (or even yourself) that can culminate into a full-blown boycott of your products.

Remember: you are not a big publisher, you cannot take the hit of a really bad decision.


### Free-to-Play gaming and Mobile Games

Let's talk a bit about free to play games.

We cannot approach that topic without speaking a little about mobile games, the very kingdom of free to play gaming.

First of all: **What NOT to do**:

- Make people wait/pay in order to play (The so-called "energy system", very popular at the moment). Pay-to-Win mechanics are bad, but almost understandable, but Pay-to-Play ones are simply disgusting;
- Make intrusive banners/advertisements, that stop gameplay or reduce the available screen size;
- Avoid Pay-to-Win, especially in a multiplayer game.

I also want to give you a major advice about how to use banners/advertising in a smart way:

Let people decide if they want to view an advertisement or not. Especially in a single player game, if you give them something big in return (for example double points/coins/gold for next game, or the chance to continue after a death) the will accept the offer.

This mechanism has two major positives:

- Gamers are NOT annoyed by the use of advertising, they usually see this mechanism as a trade deal: "Do ut des" (I give you, you give me in exchange);
- If they do it once, they're probably going to do it again. At the end they willingly watch advertisement for you.

It is obvious that you shouldn't kill your player in-game over and over so you can offer them the chance of watching an advertisement to continue playing, that will be seen as a form of "pay to play", from the player's perspective.
