\null\clearpage

Writing a Game Design Document
===============================

\epigraph{If you don't know where you are going. How can you expect to get there?}{\textit{Basil S. Walsh}}

One of the most discussed things in the world of Game Development is the so-called "GDD" or "Game Design Document". Some say it's a thing of the past, others swear by it, others are not really swayed by its existence.

Being an important piece of any software development process, in this book we will talk about the GDD in a more flexible way.

What is a Game Design Document
-------------------------------

The Game Design Document is a Body Of Knowledge that contains everything that is your game, and it can take many forms, such as:

- A formal design document;
- A Wiki~[g]~;
- A Kanboard ~[g]~.

The most important thing about the GDD is that it contains all the details about your game in a centralized and possibly easy-to-access place.

It is not a technical document, but mostly a design document, technical matters should be moved to a dedicated "Technical Design Document".

Possible sections of a Game Design Document
--------------------------------------------

Each game can have its own attributes, so each Game Design Document can be different, here we will present some of the most common sections you can include in your own Game Design Document.

### Project Description

This section is used to give the reader a quick description of the game, its genre (RPG, FPS, Puzzle,...), the type of demographic it covers (casual, hardcore, ...). Additional information that is believed to be important to have a basic understanding of the game can be put here.

This section should not be longer than a couple paragraphs.

A possible excerpt of a description could be the following:

> This game design document describes the details for a 2D side scrolling platformer game where the player makes use of mechanics based on using arrows as platforms to get to the end of the level.
>
> The game will feature a story based on the central America ancient culture (Mayan, Aztec, ...).
>
> The name is not defined yet but the candidate names are:

### Characters

If your game involves a story, you need to introduce your characters first, so that everything that follows will be clear.

A possible excerpt of a characters list can be the following:

> **Ohm** is the main character, part of the group called "The Resistance" and fights for restoring the electrical order in the circuit world.
>
> **Fad** is the main side character, last survivor and heir of the whole knowledge of "The Capacitance" group. Its main job is giving technical assistance to Ohm.
>
> **Gen. E. Rator** is the main antagonist, general of "The Reactance" movement, which wants to conquer the circuit world.

This can be a nice place where to put some character artwork.

If your game does not include a story, you can just avoid inserting this section altogether.

### Storyline

After introducing the characters, it's time to talk about the events that will happen in the game.

An example of story excerpt can be the one below:

> It has been 500 mega-ticks that the evil **Rator** and the reactance has come to power, bringing a new era of darkness into the circuit world.
>
> After countless antics by the evil reactance members, part of the circuit world's population united into what is called "The Resistance".
>
> Strong of thousands of members and the collaboration of *the Capacitance*, the resistance launched an attack against the evil reactance empire, but the empire stroke back with a carpet surcharge attack, decimating the resistance and leaving only few survivors that will be tasked to rebuild the resistance and free the world from the reactance's evil influence.
>
> This is when a small child, and their parents were found. The child's name, **Ohm**, sounded prophetic of a better future of the resistance.
>
> And this is where our story begins.

As with the Characters section, if your game does not include a story, you can just skip this section.

#### The theme

When people read the design document, it is fundamental that the game's theme is quickly understood: it can be a comedy-based story, or a game about hardships and fighting for a better future, or maybe it is a purely fantastic game based on ancient history...

Here is a quick example:

> This is a game about fighting for a better future, dealing with hardships and the deep sadness you face when you are living in a world on the brink of ruin.
>
> This game should still underline the happiness of small victories, and give a sense of "coziness" in such small things, even though the world can feel cold.

If you feel that this section is not relevant for your game, you can skip it.

#### Progression

After defining the story, you should take care of describing how the story progresses as the player furthers their experience in a high-level fashion.

An example:

> The game starts with an intro where the ruined city is shown to the player and the protagonist receives their magic staff that will accompany them through the game.
>
> The first levels are a basic tutorial on movement, where the shaman teaches the player the basic movement patterns as well as the first mechanic: *staff boosting*. Combat mechanics are taught as well.
>
> After the tutorial has been completed, the player advances to the first real game area: **The stone jungle**.
>
> ...

### Levels and Environments

In this section we will define how levels are constructed and what mechanics the will entail, in detail.

We can see a possible example here:

> The First Level (Tutorial) is based in a medieval-like (but adapted to the center-America theme) training camp, outside, where the player needs to learn jumping, movement and fight straw puppets.
> At the end of the basic fighting and movement training, the player is introduced to *staff boosting* which is used to first jump to a ledge that is too high for a normal jump, and then the mechanic is used to boost towards an area too far forward to reach without boosting.
>
> ...

Some level artwork can be included in this section, to further define how the levels will look and feel.

### Gameplay

This section will be used to describe your gameplay. This section can become really long, but do not fear, as you can split it in meaningful sections to help with organization and searching.

#### Goals

> Why is the player playing your game?

This question should be answered in this section. Here you insert the goals of your game, both long and short term.

An example could be the following:

> Long Term Goal: Stop the great circuit world war
>
> Optional Long Term Goal: Restore the circuit world to its former glory.
>
> Short Term Goals:
>
> - Find the key to the exit
>
> - Neutralize Enemies
>
> - Get to the next level

#### Game Mechanics

<!-- TODO -->
\placeholder

#### Skills

<!-- TODO -->
\placeholder

#### Items/Powerups

<!-- TODO -->
\placeholder

#### Difficulty Management and Progression

<!-- TODO -->
\placeholder

#### Losing Conditions

Many times we focus so much on how the player will get to the end of the game that we absolutely forget how the player can *not* get to the end of the game.

Losing conditions must be listed and have the same importance of the winning conditions, since they add to the challenge of the game itself.

A possible example of how a "losing conditions" section could be written is the following:

> The game can be lost in the following ways:
>
> - Losing all the lives and not "continuing" (Game Over)
>
> - Not finding all the Crystal Oscillators (Bad Ending)

A possible variation on the theme could be having an "endings" section, where all (both good, bad and neutral) endings are listed.

### Graphic Style and Art

<!-- TODO -->
\placeholder

### Sound and Music

<!-- TODO -->
\placeholder

### User Interface

<!-- TODO -->
\placeholder

### Game Controls

In this section you insert everything that concerns the way the game controls, eventually including special peripherals that may be used.

This will help you focusing on better implementing the input system and limit your choices to what is feasible and useful for your project, instead of just going by instinct.

Below, a possible way to write such section

> The game will control mainly via mouse and keyboard, using the mouse to aim the weapon and shoot and keyboard for moving the character.
>
> Alternatively, it's possible to connect a twin-stick gamepad, where the right stick moves the weapon crosshair, while the left stick is used to move the character, one of the back triggers of the gamepad can be configured to shoot.
>
> If the gamepad is used, there will be a form of aim assistance can be enabled to make the game more accessible to gamepad users.

### Accessibility Options

Here you can add all the options that are used to allow more people to access your game, in more ways than you think.

Below, we can see an example of many accessibility options in a possible game.

> The game will include a "colorblind mode", allowing the colours to be colorblind-friendly: such mode will include 3 options: Deuteranopia, Tritanopia and Monochromacy.
>
> Additionally, the game will include an option to disable flashing lights, making the game a bit more friendly for people with photosensitivity.
>
> The game will support "aim assistance", making the crosshair snap onto the enemy found within a certain distance from the crosshair.
>
> In order to assist people who have issues with the tough platforming and reaction times involved, we will include the possibility to play the game at 75%, 50% and 25% speed.

### Tools

This section is very useful for team coordination, as having the same toolkit prevents most of the "works for me" situations, where the game works well for a tester/developer while it either crashes or doesn't work correctly for others.

This section is very useful in case we want to include new people in our team and quickly integrate them into the project.

In this section we should describe our toolkit, possibly with version numbers included (which help reducing incompatibilities), as well as libraries and frameworks. The section should follow the trace below:

> The tools and frameworks used to develop the game are the following:
>
> **Pixel Art Drawing:** Aseprite 1.2.13
>
> **IDE:** Eclipse 2019-09
>
> **Music Composition:** Linux MultiMedia Studio (LMMS) 1.2.1
>
> **Map and level design:** Tiled 1.3.1
>
> **Framework:** SFML 2.5.1

### Marketing

#### Target Audience

<!-- TODO -->
\placeholder

#### Available Platforms

<!-- TODO -->
\placeholder

#### Monetization

<!-- TODO -->
\placeholder

#### Internationalization and Localization

<!-- TODO -->
\placeholder

Where to go from here
---------------------

This chapter represents only a guideline on what a Game Design Document can be, feel free to remove any sections that don't apply to your current project as well as adding new ones that are pertinent to it.

A Game Design Document is a Body of Knowledge that will accompany you throughout the whole game development process and it will be the most helpful if you are comfortable with it and it is shaped to serve you.
